Doc on using machine config pool during update (#34445)
openshift/openshift-docs: updating/update-using-custom-machine-config-pools.adoc

[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools"]
= Use of customized machine config pools during update
include::modules/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: update-using-custom-machine-config-pools

toc::[]

> In OpenShift V4 nodes are not considered individually. Nodes are considered in groups i.e. machine config pools(MCP). In a typical OCP cluster we have two MCPs. The MCP for the control plane is called master pool and other group which have worker nodes is called worker pool. During an OpenShift update all pools are updated concurrently.The MCP update process involves updating the machines to the new OS version(if required) along with updating some daemonsets and reboot it to comeplete the process. The MCP gives us the ability to pause a pool and it will make sure that the OS is not updated/rebooted during the update process. We can create more than one customized machine config pools out of the the worker pool and will give us a lot of control on the sequence in which the worker nodes are updated.

Reviewer: nit: `concurrently.The` -> `concurrently. The` (adding a missing space after the period).  Same for `version(if` -> `version (if`.

Also:

> We can create more than one customized machine config pools out of the the worker pool and will give us a lot of control on the sequence in which the worker nodes are updated.

to:

> We can create more than one customized machine config pool out of the worker pool, which will give us a more control over the sequence in which the compute nodes are updated.

or some such.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

[NOTE]
----

> Creating custom MCP using master nodes is not suported.

Reviewer: nit: `suported` -> `supported`.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

Machine config operator (responsible for updating the nodes) will ignore the custom MCP using the master nodes.
This is required to make sure control plane nodes remain stable.
----

> An OpenShift or Kubernetes cluster is highly available by design and there are many Kuberenetes features (e.g. pod disruption budget, pod affinity, health checks, replicas) which can make the application highly available in case of node failures.

Reviewer: nit: `Kuberenetes` -> `Kubernetes`.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

> However there might be some secenarios where a controlled rollout of upgrade to the worker nodes is desired. This helps to make sure the mission critical application stays available during the whole update process even if the upgrade process cause a failure. It is also useful in scenarios where we can not have big maintaine window to complete the whole update process. This is can be characterized as a canary release i.e. we can control the rollout of worker nodes by controlling the machine config pools. After the update of the first MCP, the application compatibility can be verfied and then the whole fleet can be updated gradually to the new version.

Reviewer: nits: `cause a failure` -> `causes a failure` and `maintaine` -> `maintenance`.  Actually, there's a lot going on here.  Maybe we should split the canary angle and the timeboxed-maintenance-window angle into two separate paragraphs?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

[NOTE]
----
A node can be part of at most one MCP. The machine config operator rolls out update to all the unpaused worker pools simultaneously.
For example, if maxUnavailable is set to one then 1 node from each MCPs will be updated concurrently.

> During the update process of nodes (as per are the  `maxUnavailable` value) in a MCP are cordoned and drained before it is updated.

Reviewer: This is not always true, see [these docs][1].  Not sure if it's worth bringing those docs over here, or just leaving the cordon- and drain-ness of these updates unspecified here.

[1]: https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/db56bd2856b4892f3b72e6056904a29676d362d4/docs/MachineConfigDaemon.md#optimized-updates

Author: Right.  I was aware of this but forgot to mention that it is conditional i.e. only happens if a reboot is required.  The reason I have mentioned cordon and drain stuff because that is a very important step in the workflow. Customers should now what happens when the node get rebooted.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

> Once the update process completes the nodes are un-cordned.

Reviewer: nit: `un-cordned` -> `uncordoned`.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

----

> == Workflow of doing a canary release using MCP

Reviewer: nit: "release" is a bit loaded.  I usually think it means "OpenShift release image (and referenced images)", like `quay.io/openshift-release-dev/ocp-release:4.8.0-x86_64`.  Can we use something like `Updating canary machine config pools`?

Author: Updating the heading as `Workflow for updating worker nodes with canary rollout`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

> . Create MCPs out of the worker pool. The number of nodes in each MCP depends on few factors like maintaince window duration for each MCP, the amount of reserve capacity (extra worker nodes) present.

Reviewer: nit: `, the amount` -> `and the amount`

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

+
[NOTE]
====

> In case of an failure i.e. the MCP with the new version does not work as expected the applications, the extra capacity will help to maintain the quality of service of the applications.

Reviewer: `the MCP with the new version does not work as expected the applications` -> `applications have degraded performance on the new MachineConfig` or some such, because `as expected the applications` doesn't quite parse for me.

Also `the extra capacity` seems to be a reference reaching out of this note to the preceding `reserve capacity` phrasing.  We probably want the note to be able to stand alone.  Maybe drop the note from this process section and include the canary motivational in your lead-in section?

Author: Changed the language in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

====
+
. Pause the MCPs created in the previous step.
+

> . Start the update process. The update process will only update the MCP which contains the master nodes i.e. the control plane.

Reviewer: There may be other pre-existing pools besides the ones created above.  Maybe say something more generic like:

> The update process will only update the unpaused pools, including the `master` control-plane pool.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

+

> . Once the control plane update is completed, unpause one MCP. It will update the MCP to the new version of OCP. You can check the progress of the update in the web console (In Administrator view -> Administration -> Cluster settings ) as well as running `$ oc get mcp` CLI command.

Reviewer: Doesn't have to be a "new version of OCP"; this process could apply to any MachineConfig update.  OpenShift updates are one source of MachineConfig updates, but they are not the only source.  For example, users may also create new MachineConfigs directly, or indirectly via KubeletConfig.

I also usually don't include `$` prompts in commands unless I'm creating them in a block, so probably:

> ... running the `oc get mcp` CLI command.

or some such for your inline command.

And also, no need to abbreviate here; maybe `oc get machineconfigpools.machineconfiguration.openshift.io`.  Not sure what the doc precedent is for that sort of thing...

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

+
[NOTE]
====

> You can change `maxUnavailable` in a MCP to specify the percentage or the number of machines that can be updating at any given time. default is 1.

Reviewer: nit: `default is 1` -> `The default is 1`.  Or can we just link, or expect folks to find, [the existing API docs][1]?

[1]: https://docs.openshift.com/container-platform/4.7/rest_api/machine_apis/machineconfigpool-machineconfiguration-openshift-io-v1.html#specification

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

====
+
. Test if the applications are working as expected on the newly update MCP.

> . If you want to gohead with updating the rest of the MCPs then unpause rest of the MCPs one by one till all worker nodes are updated to the new version.

Reviewer: nits: `gohead with updating` -> `update`, `rest` -> `the rest`, and `till` -> `until`.

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/c27e14a1b4785cc8704f11d191797f198c10f027

== Steps to create a MCP

. Get the list of worker nodes.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get nodes | grep -v master

Reviewer: This `grep` seems brittle.  We should be able to use a role label/annotation to directly select nodes that belong to the `worker` pool.

Reviewer: [Label filtering][1] seems to work:

```console
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' nodes
NAME                                       STATUS   ROLES    AGE   VERSION
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-a-s75z4   Ready    worker   20m   v1.21.1+051ac4f
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-b-dglj2   Ready    worker   20m   v1.21.1+051ac4f
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-c-lldbm   Ready    worker   20m   v1.21.1+051ac4f
```

[1]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/working-with-objects/labels/#list-and-watch-filtering

Reviewer: Or, if you only need the names:

```console
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' -o 'jsonpath={range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}' nodes
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-a-s75z4
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-b-dglj2
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-c-lldbm
```

----

> . Add the MCP name as label to the worker node and remove the `worker` label.

Reviewer: I feel like the canary/pause docs should be fairly orthogonal to the "create a new pool" docs.  Are there some existing "create a new pool" docs we can link to?  #31726 is close, but doesn't quite get down to actual steps.  #33057 is also close, but is focused on `infra` instead of generic pool manipulation.  Anything I'm missing in this space which we can lean on?

Author: This will be broken down in to a separate module. I will ask doc folks to do that.

Reviewer 2: I think it'd definitely be good to keep this doc out of the weeks of creation of MCPs. Lets try to focus on the two supplemental upgrade strategies above and beyond the default out of the box master and worker all at once strategy.

1) A canary worker pool where a small portion of the entire fleet is updated, allowed to soak looking for external qualification before the bulk of the machines are updated.
2) Workers are broken up into chunks so that an upgrade which will not fit into one maintenance window can be slotted into multiple windows over time.

Leave it as an exercise for the reader to apply a mix of those two to meet their needs.

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcp/mcp_foo --patch '{"spec":{"paused":true}}' --type=merge
----

=== Unpause a MCP

Unpausing will enable the nodes in the MCP to move to the new OS version and reboot (if required) it.

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcp/mcp_foo --patch '{"spec":{"paused":false}}' --type=merge
----

== Steps to remove a node from a MCP

A node must have a role to be properly functioning with in the OpenShift cluster.
If you want to remove a node from a MCP, you should first relabel the node as a worker as it should be part of worker MCP if is not going to be part of any other MCP. Once it is labeled as worker only then proceed to unlabel it from the MCP.

. Label it as worker
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node <node name>  node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=
----
+
. Remove the MCP label
+
[source,terminal]
----
$oc label node <node name> node-role.kubernetes.io/<mcp name>-
----
+
. The machine config operator is then going to reconcile the node to the worker pool configuration. Check the output of `oc get mcp` to make sure the worker pool is updated before going to the next step.
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc get mcp

Reviewer 3: For clarity, example output should list complete output from a testcluster that would also include fields like machinecount, readymachinecount, updatedmachinecount, etc. Also, it would be more clear to print result when worker pool has been completely updated i.e. UPDATED = true

Author: I agree, will put outputs here. I am not sure about calling out the details of the output. But open to suggestions.

Author: Added examples in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/3f24026e49caf7437eeff4b286bf49a8b9f141cc

NAME     CONFIG                                             UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED
mcp_foo  rendered-mcp_foo-e13e08651cde58bdfcaeb2f6f2a5b23c  True      False      False
master   rendered-master-63f780fa30a02f897ffcd2d6c3fba467   True      False      False
worker   rendered-worker-e13e08651cde58bdfcaeb2f6f2a5b23c   False     True       False
----
+
. Delete the MCP
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc delete mcp mcp_foo
----

== In Case Of Failure

In case of failure, keep all the MCP paused and wait for the version with the bug fix and start the update process again.

[NOTE]
====
We do not recommend updating MCPs to different versions i.e. one MCP from 4.Y.100 to 4.Y+1.10 and another 4.Y.100 to 4.Y+1.20.

> This scenario is never tested and may result in to undefined cluster state.

Reviewer: I don't see any obvious problems with this sort of split.  But one issue would be that until you put the canary pool(s) on 4.(y+1).20, you are probably not going to want to put your production pools on that release (for folks who are conservative and non-Kube-native enough to have canary pools in the first place).  So maybe gentler reminder "hey, if you have a canary pool, don't forget to use it to test the nominal fix too" instead of your current warning about... effectively swapping one canary pool for another... being not recommended?

Author: Unless we are testing this scenario we can not say this situation will be ok. Also MCO folks and architects mentioned this specifically. There were concern that it will lead to situations which can not be predicted.

Reviewer 2: In the past we've said as long as all sets of nodes are moving along valid upgrade edges we're OK.

So as long as there are edges from 4.Y.100 to 4.Y+1.10 AND from 4.Y.100 to 4.Y+1.20 we're fine but this does get really complicated to reason about. They should avoid situations where they never converge because they're going to have to evaluate edges across all of these sets until they do. So ideally they'd allow that first MCP to upgrade from 4.Y+1.10 to 4.Y+1.20 before doing anyhting else.

This stalling is part of the reason we've made sure that z-streams are always cumulative, it eases this considerably.

I'm not sure if we should keep this note or just simplify it to say that all MCPs need to upgrade along edges that exist in the graph without going into much more detail.

Author: > 'm not sure if we should keep this note or just simplify it to say that all MCPs need to upgrade along edges that exist in the graph without going into much more detail.

Yeah, it is confusing to understand unless some one has very clear understanding of how the graphs are decided.

Reviewer 4: @LalatenduMohanty @sdodson What is the decision here? Leave the note or remove it?

Author: We will go ahead with the current note. We will probably improve the text in future.

[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools"]
= Use of customized machine config pools during update
include::modules/common-attributes.adoc[]
:context: update-using-custom-machine-config-pools

toc::[]

> In OpenShift V4 nodes are not considered individually. Nodes are considered in groups i.e. machine config pools(MCP). In a typical OCP cluster we have two MCPs. The MCP for the control plane is called master pool and other group which have worker nodes is called worker pool. During an OpenShift update all pools are updated concurrently. The MCP update process involves updating the machines to the new OS version(if required) along with updating some daemonsets and reboot it to comeplete the process. The MCP gives us the ability to pause a pool and it will make sure that the OS is not updated/rebooted during the update process. We can create more than one customized machine config pool out of the worker pool, which will give us a more control over the sequence in which the nodes are updated.

Author: Sure, will do

Machine config operator (responsible for updating the nodes) will ignore the custom MCP using the master nodes.
This is required to make sure control plane nodes remain stable.
----

An OpenShift or Kubernetes cluster is highly available by design and there are many Kubernetes features (e.g. pod disruption budget, pod affinity, health checks, replicas) which can make the application highly available in case of node failures.

However there might be some secenarios where a controlled rollout of upgrade to the worker nodes is desired. This helps to make sure the mission critical application stays available during the whole update process even if the upgrade process cause a failure. It is also useful in scenarios where we can not have big maintenance window to complete the whole update process. 

The slow rollout of a new OpenShift version to worker nodes can be characterized as a canary release i.e. we can control the rollout of worker nodes by controlling the machine config pools. After the update of the first MCP, the application compatibility can be verfied and then the whole fleet can be updated gradually to the new version.

[NOTE]
----

> A node can be part of at most one MCP. The machine config operator rolls out update to all the unpaused worker pools simultaneously.

Author: Good catch. I wanted to say ` A node can be part of at least one MCP` or `a node must have a role at any given time to be properly functioning`

== Workflow for updating worker nodes with canary rollout

. Create MCPs out of the worker pool. The number of nodes in each MCP depends on a few factors like maintaince window duration for each MCP and the amount of reserve capacity (extra worker nodes) present.
+
[NOTE]
====
In case of a failure i.e. if the MCP with the new version does not work as expected with the applications, the nodes in the pool can be cordoned and drained. So that the application will not run on these nodes and the extra capacity will help to maintain the quality of service of the applications.
====
+
. Pause the MCPs created in the previous step.
+
[NOTE]
====
Pausing the MCP will also pause the kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer automatic CA certificates rotation.
You need to unpause these MCPs before the next automatic CA certificate renewal is scheduled.
See the link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/5651701[article] to findout how much time you have before the next automatic CA certificate renewal happens.

> The update process including updating the whole worker pool need to complete before the CA certification happens.

Author: @sinnykumari Does this look ok to you?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/3fea62f70589f507a3fefd7ae8a3c14c8e84fe68

[id="update-using-custom-machine-config-pools"]

> = Use of customized machine config pools during update

Reviewer 3: Perhaps we can keep it `Use of custom machine config pools during update`

Author: customized is a better word than custom IMO. However these will be sorted when doc peer review happens. So I am not worried about these.

Reviewer 4: @LalatenduMohanty @sinnykumari We use the term _custom machine config pools_ elsewhere in the docs.

Author: @mburke5678 sounds good to me.

The slow rollout of a new OpenShift version to worker nodes can be characterized as a canary release i.e. we can
control the rollout of worker nodes by controlling the machine config pools. After the update of the first MCP, the
application compatibility can be verfied and then the whole fleet can be updated gradually to the new version.

== Workflow for updating worker nodes with canary rollout

. Create MCPs out of the worker pool. The number of nodes in each MCP depends on a few factors like maintaince window duration for each MCP and the amount of reserve capacity (extra worker nodes) present.
+
[NOTE]
====
In case of a failure i.e. if the MCP with the new version does not work as expected with the applications, the nodes in the pool can be cordoned and drained. So that the application will not run on these nodes and the extra capacity will help to maintain the quality of service of the applications.
====
+
. Pause the MCPs created in the previous step.
+
[NOTE]
====
Pausing the MCP will also pause the kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer automatic CA certificates rotation.
You need to unpause these MCPs before the next automatic CA certificate renewal is scheduled.

> See the link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/5651701[article] to findout how much time you have before the next automatic CA certificate renewal happens.

Reviewer 3: Linked KCS article doesn't clearly specify that you have to apply cert at 292 days on node. It just says, cert is renewed at 292 days and expiry is 365 days. To avoid confusion, I think we should clearly specify in this doc that new cert should be allowed to be applied on node when renewal occurs i.e. 292 days and then post 365 days, it can be unpaused again to remove old certs. Otherwise, cluster will hit the issue, see https://bugzilla.redhat.com/show_bug.cgi?id=1970329#c25

Author: With the latest update I have changed the language to include what you suggested. PATL

> The update process including updating the whole worker pool need to complete before the CA certification happens.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The update process including updating the whole worker pool need to complete before the CA cert rotation happens.
```

Author: fixed

====
+

> . Start the update process. The update process will only update the MCPs which are not paused. That includes the master nodes i.e. the control plane.

Reviewer 3: We haven't explicitly mentioned what happened to worker pool? Once we moved all worker nodes to newly created custom MCPs, are we also pausing worker pool?

Author: No we do not need to. I have also updated the next step as following `Pause the MCPs you do not want to update as part of the default update process.`

[NOTE]
====
You can change `maxUnavailable` in a MCP to specify the percentage or the number of machines that can be updating at any given time. The default is 1.
====
+
. Test if the applications are working as expected on the newly updated MCP.

. Update the remaining MCPs By unpausing one by one till all worker nodes are updated.

. Unpause the MCPs you had paused in the previous step.

== Steps to create a MCP

. Get the list of worker nodes.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' -o 'jsonpath={range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}' nodes
----
+
.. Example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' -o 'jsonpath={range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}' nodes
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-a-s75z4
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-b-dglj2
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-c-lldbm
----
. Add the MCP name as label to the worker node.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node <node name> node-role.kubernetes.io/<mcp name>=
----
.. Example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node ci-ln-gtrwm8t-f76d1-spbl7-worker-a-xk76k node-role.kubernetes.io/mcp1=
node/ci-ln-gtrwm8t-f76d1-spbl7-worker-a-xk76k labeled
----
+

> . Create a the machineconfig pool

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
. Create the machineconfig pool
```

Author: Fixed.

+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat mcp_foo.yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:

>   name: mcp_foo | <1>

Reviewer 5: `mcp1` here to match the following output?

Reviewer 3: usually `_` in the name won't work. `oc apply` is going to complain.

Author: Fixed

spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchExpressions:

>       - {key: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role, operator: In, values: [worker,mcp_foo]} | <1>

Reviewer 3: this need to be fixed, you are creating `mcp1` as nod label but applying something else here. It will be good idea to try on a cluster and then update it.

Author: Fixed

control the rollout of worker nodes by controlling the machine config pools. After the update of the first MCP, the
application compatibility can be verfied and then the whole fleet can be updated gradually to the new version.

== Workflow for updating worker nodes with canary rollout

. Create MCPs out of the worker pool. The number of nodes in each MCP depends on a few factors like maintaince window duration for each MCP and the amount of reserve capacity (extra worker nodes) present.
+
[NOTE]
====
In case of a failure i.e. if the MCP with the new version does not work as expected with the applications, the nodes in the pool can be cordoned and drained. So that the application will not run on these nodes and the extra capacity will help to maintain the quality of service of the applications.
====
+
. Pause the MCPs you do not want to update as part of the default update process.
+
[NOTE]
====
Pausing the MCP will also pause the kube-apiserver-to-kubelet-signer automatic CA certificates rotation.
New CA certificates are generation and removal happens at 292 day (from the installation day) and 365 days respectively.

> The renewal and removal of the certs need reboot of the nodes.

Reviewer 3: With OCP 4.7 and onward, cert rotation doesn't require node reboot or drain https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/docs/MachineConfigDaemon.md#drainless-and-rebootless-updates . Unpausing MCP is required so that new rendered config that contains updated cert content can be applied on node without drain and reboot. If this doc is intended to be available for 4.7 or above releases, we can update it with same. Otherwise, we should mention behavior for both cases OCP_REL < 4.7 and OCP_REL >= 4.7.

Author: Updated the text to reflect your suggestion. I wrote the doc in a way that we can back port it to till 4.6 without any changes. Also I am little skeptical about writing too much about the cert rotation here. Ideally there should be some documentation about the automatic cert rotation in the OCP official docs which I could have linked here.

Author: Pushed the change in https://github.com/openshift/openshift-docs/commit/8e7ab60fab996fa62e4fae1dbff4dfa0cfd75e27

Reviewer 3: agree that this is very confusing and everything is not documented at single place. We all have realized this behavior few months back when cluster started completing 1 year lifecycle and at the same time pools are paused. I believe paused pool was never implemented as a feature and it came as a escape hatch.

If the MCPs are paused then the node reboots will not happen and that would make the cluster degraded.
See the link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/5651701[article] to findout how much time you have before the next automatic CA certificate rotation.
Make sure the pools are unpaused when the CA cert rotation happens.
====
+
. Start the update process. The update process will only update the MCPs which are not paused. That includes the master nodes i.e. the control plane.
+
. Once the control plane update is completed, unpause one MCP. Unpausing the MCP will start the update process for the pool of nodes. You can check the progress of the update in the web console (In Administrator view -> Administration -> Cluster settings ) as well as running `$ oc get machineconfigpools` CLI command.
+
[NOTE]
====
You can change `maxUnavailable` in a MCP to specify the percentage or the number of machines that can be updating at any given time. The default is 1.
====
+
. Test if the applications are working as expected on the newly updated MCP.

. Update the remaining MCPs By unpausing one by one till all worker nodes are updated.

> . Unpause the MCPs you had paused in the previous step.

Reviewer 5: Sounds like this sentence is a bit redundant based on the above sentence is clear enough.

Author: You are right. Will fix it.

== Steps to create a MCP

. Get the list of worker nodes.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' -o 'jsonpath={range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}' nodes
----
+
.. Example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc get -l 'node-role.kubernetes.io/master!=' -o 'jsonpath={range .items[*]}{.metadata.name}{"\n"}{end}' nodes
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-a-s75z4
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-b-dglj2
ci-ln-pwnll6b-f76d1-s8t9n-worker-c-lldbm
----
. Add the MCP name as label to the worker node.
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node <node name> node-role.kubernetes.io/<mcp name>=
----
.. Example:
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node ci-ln-gtrwm8t-f76d1-spbl7-worker-a-xk76k node-role.kubernetes.io/mcpfoo=
node/ci-ln-gtrwm8t-f76d1-spbl7-worker-a-xk76k labeled
----
+
. Create the machineconfig pool
+
[source,yaml]
----
$ cat mcpfoo.yaml
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: mcpfoo | <1>
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:

>     matchExpressions:

Reviewer 5: Can I know why here we are using `matchExpressions` syntax, but not `matchLabels` dumped out from `worker` mcp, e.g:
```
apiVersion: machineconfiguration.openshift.io/v1
kind: MachineConfigPool
metadata:
  name: mcpfoo
spec:
  machineConfigSelector:
    matchLabels:
      machineconfiguration.openshift.io/role: worker
  nodeSelector:
    matchLabels:
      node-role.kubernetes.io/mcpfoo: ""
```

Author: There is no reason. Both should work . I used this for my testing from https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/docs/custom-pools.md

Author: Reference https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/install/0000_80_machine-config-operator_01_machineconfigpool.crd.yaml#L181 and https://github.com/openshift/machine-config-operator/blob/master/install/0000_80_machine-config-operator_01_machineconfigpool.crd.yaml#L211

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcp/mcpfoo --patch '{"spec":{"paused":false}}' --type=merge
----
Example:
[source,terminal]
----
$  oc patch mcp/mcpfoo --patch '{"spec":{"paused":false}}' --type=merge
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/mcpfoo patched
----

== Steps to remove a node from a MCP

A node must have a role to be properly functioning with in the OpenShift cluster.
If you want to remove a node from a MCP, you should first relabel the node as a worker as it should be part of worker MCP if is not going to be part of any other MCP. Once it is labeled as worker only then proceed to unlabel it from the MCP.

. Label it as worker if it does not have worker label
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node <node name>  node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=
----
+
. Remove the MCP label
+
[source,terminal]
----
$oc label node <node name> node-role.kubernetes.io/<mcp name>-
----
+
. The machine config operator is then going to reconcile the node to the worker pool configuration. Check the output of `oc get mcp` to make sure the worker pool is updated before going to the next step.
+
. Delete the MCP
+
[source,terminal]
----

> $ oc delete mcp mcpfoo

Reviewer 3: For consistency, we can keep it `oc delete mcp <mcp name>` and move existing command in example if needed.

[source,terminal]
----
$ oc patch mcp/<mcp name> --patch '{"spec":{"paused":false}}' --type=merge
----
Example:
[source,terminal]
----
$  oc patch mcp/mcpfoo --patch '{"spec":{"paused":false}}' --type=merge
machineconfigpool.machineconfiguration.openshift.io/mcpfoo patched
----

== Steps to remove a node from a MCP

A node must have a role to be properly functioning with in the OpenShift cluster.
If you want to remove a node from a MCP, you should first relabel the node as a worker as it should be part of worker MCP if is not going to be part of any other MCP. Once it is labeled as worker only then proceed to unlabel it from the MCP.

. Label it as worker if it does not have worker label
+
[source,terminal]
----
$ oc label node <node name>  node-role.kubernetes.io/worker=
----
+
. Remove the MCP label
+
[source,terminal]
----
$oc label node <node name> node-role.kubernetes.io/<mcp name>-
----
+
. The machine config operator is then going to reconcile the node to the worker pool configuration. Check the output of `oc get mcp` to make sure the worker pool is updated before going to the next step.

> +

Reviewer 4: @LalatenduMohanty @sdodson @jiajliu 
When I moved the node back to the worker MCP, by removing the label, the `oc get mcp` command showed the worker nodes at the proper machine count (3), but the custom MCP I created stll showed 1. Is this expected? I expected the custom MCP to show 0.

```
$oc get mcp
NAME           CONFIG                                                   UPDATED   UPDATING   DEGRADED   MACHINECOUNT   READYMACHINECOUNT   UPDATEDMACHINECOUNT   DEGRADEDMACHINECOUNT   AGE
master         rendered-master-1203f157d053fd987c7cbd91e3fbc0ed         True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      61m
mcp-noupdate   rendered-mcp-noupdate-5ad4791166c468f3a35cd16e734c9028   True      False      False      1              1                   1                     0                      21m
worker         rendered-worker-5ad4791166c468f3a35cd16e734c9028         True      False      False      3              3                   3                     0                      61m
```

Author: Yeah, the custom MCP should show 0. But the reconciliation takes few minutes. So if you check the output after few minutes it should be zero.
